Orchestrating Microbiome Analysis with Bioconductor

Author(s): Tuomas Borman

Microbes play a pivotal role in human health and disease, yet the mechanisms
underlying these interactions remain largely unknown due to their complexity.
Microbiome research faces challenges related to scalability, interoperability,
and a lack of standardization. Studies have grown in terms of both sample size
and data dimensionality. While sequencing data forms the foundation of most
analyses, other omics layers are increasingly incorporated to provide a more
holistic view. However, integration of multi-omics datasets is still poorly
supported. Moreover, limited interoperability between tools has hindered
efficient multi-omics analysis, and heterogeneous analytical approaches have
reduced reproducibility and transparency. To address these challenges, we have
developed a microbiome data science ecosystem built around the
TreeSummarizedExperiment class—an extension of Bioconductor’s core
SummarizedExperiment container. This design choice enables scalable and
efficient data management while ensuring interoperability with the broader
Bioconductor ecosystem. A comprehensive suite of tools for microbiome data
science is implemented across multiple R/Bioconductor packages, which
collectively form the mia (Microbiome Analysis) package family. The ecosystem
is documented in the Orchestrating Microbiome Analysis (OMA) online book, which
not only provides practical examples but also promotes best practices in
microbiome research. The project is community-driven, actively growing with
contributions from independent developers—and we welcome all new contributors.
