Orchestrating Microbiome Analysis with Bioconductor

Author(s): Tuomas Borman, Leo M Lahti

Because of the complex and high dimensional nature of microbiome data, machine
learning and other computational approaches have become an instrumental part of
the researcherâ€™s toolkit in this rapidly evolving field. There is an increasing
need to develop robust and reproducible methods that take into account current
and future trends in microbiome research such as multi-omics, expanding
datasets, and longitudinal study designs. The previous solutions in microbiomics
have fallen short in addressing these modern requirements, particularly in
terms of scalability and data integration. To meet these challenges, the
research community has extended the widely adopted SummarizedExperiment data
container to TreeSummarizedExperiment, enabling support for microbiome-specific
data structures such as hierarchical relationships. The framework is further
enriched with mia (Microbiome Analysis) package family and packages by
independent developers, providing methods for common data operations,
visualization, and advanced analytical approaches. This session will showcase
the latest advances in microbiome data science within Bioconductor, focusing
on the mia (Microbiome Analysis) framework through a practical case study. We
will also present Orchestrating Microbiome Analysis with Bioconductor, a freely
available online book designed to promote best practices and facilitate adoption
of the ecosystem. Together, these resources form a foundation for reproducible,
scalable, and transparent microbiome data science, and they continue to evolve
through active community contributions.
